Vol. XXli] ENTOMOLOGICAL NEWS 19

Mallophaga from Bolivian Birds.

By V. L. KELLOGG and J. H. PAIXE, Stanford University,
California.

The following" determinations and descriptions of new species 
of Mallophaga refer to a small collection of specimens
from Bolivian birds in 1901 by the late Perry O. Simons.
(This unfortunate collector of birds for the British Museum
was murdered by Indians in the Bolivian mountains in 1902 (?)

In Simons' notes the birds are listed only under Bolivian
vernacular or descriptive English names, and we are unable
to ascribe them with certainty to their proper species. The
English names reveal at least their general sort, as duck, humming 
bird, eagle, etc.

Docophorus laticeps Giebel.

Several specimens from the "white-headed oriole" (Choro,
Bolivia, 3500 metres, dry season).

Docophorus communis Nitzsch.
Specimens from "bird" (Choro, Bolivia).

Docophorus fissi-signatus n. sp. (Fig. 1.)
Two females from "desert curlew" (Lagonillas, Bolivia).
This species belongs to Piaget's type fisignati from the Spoon
bills and Ibises and is the second of this type that we have
found on curlews in this country.

Description of female. Body length, 2.4 mm. ; width, 1.06 mm.
Signature double. Head : Length, .66 mm. ; width, .68 mm. ; quite dark
in color except for the clypeus ; signature double, somewhat lighter
in color than the rest of the head except for its two posterior prolongations; 
margin and space between the portions of the signature
transparent. Clypeus truncate; rounded on the angles, sides slightly
diverging, suture distinct. The antennal bands extend over half the
length of the clypeus. A prominent hair arises just forward of the
termination of the antenn.-il band and another shorter one on the
margin at the termination of this hand; also a short hair near the
suture with another long one arising on the dorsal surface further
forward ; a hair arising from the ventral surface extending beyond
the lateral margin near the center. On the margin just behind the
clypeal suture are three rather long hairs, a short one on the base of
the trabeculae and a long one on the margin near the basal segment
of the antennae. Temples broadly rounded with three long hairs and
three short spines; a hair and one spine arising from the prominent
eye. Occiput nearly straight, very slightly sinuous ; the occipital
bands are prominent and are prolonged in the antennals. Second segment 
of antennae nearly as long as the last three; third shortest; second 
and third very light in color, the basal and terminal two being
somewhat darker.

Thorax shorter than head and narrower; 
length, .4 mm. Prothorax, a
trifle less than half that length;
quadrangular with a lateral marginal
band which also extends along the
posterior margin nearly to the center.
Median portion of segment light in
color. Metathorax with sides diverging, 
posterior angles broadly
rounded and posterior margin convex; 
a row of pustulated hairs extends 
around from the straight
diverging sides half way to the center
of the posterior margin. There are
two blotches leaving a narrow uncolored 
line down the center ; darker
marginal bands extend from the anterior 
angles to the median uncolored

Abdomen elliptical with segments of nearly equal length except the
ninth, which is very small and bilobed; color pale except for the
dark, sharply denned, triangular transverse blotches on the first seven
segments which extend in about two-thirds of the way to the center;
These segments also have pitchy lateral bands. A spiracle occurs in
a clear space on segments two to seven. The eighth segment is dark
in color except along the margin ; two hairs arise near the center of
this segment from clear pustules. The last two segments are rounded, 
the eighth with straight, almost parallel lateral sides, and a
fringe of hairs on the posterior margin. There is a row of hairs
across the middle of each of the preceding segments and several in
each posterior angle.

Nirmus fuscus Nitzsch.

Several specimens from "hawk" (Cochabamba, Bolivia);
also from "hawk" (Charuplaya, Bolivia).

Lipeurus temporalis Nitzsch.
Several specimens from "river duck" (Charuplaya, Bolivia).

Lipeurus epiphanes n. sp. (Fig. 2.)

Male and female from "desert curlew" (Lagonillas, Bolivia).

Description of female. Body length, 2.88 mm. ; width, .56 mm.
Head : Length, .6 mm. ; width, .34 mm. ; conical. Clypeus parabolic
in front, sides almost straight and parallel ; edge transparent with
signature concentric to it ; suture distinct ; a rather long hair at the
angle between the straight side and the parabolic front, and three
long ones at the suture. Sides of head behind the clypeal suture
straight, diverging to the antennae and bordered by the prominent
antennal bands; these bands turn inward at the clypeal suture, following 
it and almost meeting at the center; three hairs, evenly spaced,
on the margin between the clypeal suture and the short trabeculae
and another one arising on the ventral surface extending beyond the
margin at a point between the anterior two of those mentioned above.
From a point near the posterior ends of the antennal bands arise two
internal bands which extend obliquely inward a short distance, then
curve forward and run parallel to the posterior lateral angles of the
clypeal signature. A narrow dark band extends entirely around the
posterior part of the head connecting the ocular bands ; temples almost 
straight and slightly converging behind the eyes, rounded at
the posterior angles ; occipital margin concave ; occipital bands narrow, 
distinct. Eye prominent with a short hair on the dorsal surface and 
a short spine at its posterior margin ; six short hairs and
spines on the temples. Antennae pale, second segment as long as the
last two, third segment shortest. In the male antenna the first segment 
is large and about as long as the following three segments together; 
the second segment comes next in length and the fourth is
the shortest; the third has a narrow pointed appendage; there is a
horseshoe-shaped blotch at the base of the first segment.

Thorax trapezoidal ; prothorax quadrilateral, with sides slightly diverging 
behind; coxae show through plainly; length, 16 mm.; width,
28 mm. Metathorax length, .36 mm. ; width at posterior angles, .4
mm.; sides diverging behind; posterior angles rounded; lateral margins 
notched at a point about one-third the distance from the anterior 
angles with a dark blotch, probably marking the suture between 
the metathorax and mesothorax. There are six hairs arising
from the dorsal surface in the posterior angles ; the outer one is very
long and arises from a large curious papilla; the second is short,
arising from a small papilla ; the other four are very long and close
together in a group. (See b, Fig. 2.)

The abdomen is long and rather narrow, expanding slightly to the
fourth segment which is widest ; last segment bilobed, straight across
the posterior margin in the male. There are narrow dark lateral
bands on each segment except the last and transverse .blotches, which
extend about a third the way across the body, and there are also
faint lengthwise median blotches. Each lateral band extends into
the segment in front and has two long appendages which curve back
making a clear space in the anterior margin of the transverse blotch
of the segment to which the lateral band belongs. The blotch on
the last segment is median and bilobed ; the margin of this segment
is transparent. There are about six hairs on each segment except the
last, and several hairs in the posterior angles. In the male the posterior 
margin of the last segment is straight. The genitalia of the
male are as shown in Fig. 2, d.

Goniodes aliceps Tasch.

Four specimens from "Colloma" (San Ernesto, Bolivia),
"Colloma" being merely the local name, we are able to make
from it no determination of the bird, but from the kinds of
its parasites we can say, almost with certainty, that it is some
species of Tinamou, probably Crypturus sp.

Goniodes agonus Nitzsch.

Six specimens, including one
male, from "Colloma" (San Ernesto, Bolivia) collected with G. aliceps. 
The male of the curious
species has not heretofore been recorded. Our male specimen unfortunately 
has the head damaged and
of Goniodes agonus Nitzsch. c? the antennae lost. We figure (fig. 3) 
the last segments of the abdomen which differ greatly from
the female.

Colpocephalum osborni Kellogg.

Several specimens from "red-headed bustard" (Choro, Bolivia, 3700 
metres, dry season).

Colpocephalum flavescens Nitzsch.

Two females from <|l hawk" (Charuplaya, Bolivia, 1350
metres, dry season) :

Menopon maestum Kellogg and Chapman.
Three specimens from "bird" (Choro, Bolivia).

Menopon sp. (juv.).
One specimen from "blue finch" (Choro, Bolivia).

Trinoton luridum Nitzsch.
One specimen from "river duck" (Charuplaya, Bolivia).

Trinoton lituratum Nitzsch.
Two specimens from "river duck" (Charuplaya, Bolivia).

Laemobothrium sp.

Two specimens from "grasshopper hawk" (Charuplaya,
Bolivia). Although this species differs obviously from any
Laemobothrium yet described in satisfactory manner, we
shall not add a new species to this genus until the existing
species determinations have been thoroughly revised. The
genus is at present in a simply impossible condition.

Physostomum doratophorum Carriker.

Several specimens from three (three species?) "hummingbirds." (Choro. Bolivia.)
