Status of the Barred Owl (Strix varia) in Alberta 
Alberta Wildlife Status Report No. 56 
Alberta Conservation Association 

INTRODUCTION 
The barred owl (Strix varia) is a forest-dwelling 
resident of the Rocky Mountain, Parkland, 
Foothills, and Boreal Forest natural regions of 
Alberta. Early observations in this province date 
back to the 1930s (Preble 1941), with the first 
confirmed breeding occurrence in 1966 (Jones 
1966). In recent years, an appreciable amount 
of information has been collected by scientists 
and naturalists eager to further document the 
ecology of barred owls in the province. At the 
same time, rapidly increasing resource extraction 
and development in Alberta and across Canada 
have raised concerns about degradation and loss 
of habitat for barred owls and other forest- 
dwelling raptors (Kirk and Hyslop 1998). In 
Alberta and Saskatchewan, the forest industry 
has been proactive about initiating studies of 
barred owl habitat use in order to identify 
potential conflicts with current harvesting 
practices. The barred owl is currently listed as 
Sensitive in the province of Alberta because of 
its requirement for large stands of mature forest 
(Alberta Sustainable Resource Development 
2001). This report is intended to compile and 
summarize all existing information on the barred 
owl for the purpose of updating the status of the 
species in Alberta. 
HABITAT 
Throughout its North American range, the barred 
owl is associated with mixed conifer-deciduous 
forests (i.e., mixedwood forest). Often 
associated with riparian areas and wetlands, the 
species is also found in uplands where suitable 
habitat exists. In eastern North America, barred 
owls inhabit mature and old hemlock, maple, 
oak and mixedwood forest types (Nicholls and 
Warner 1972, Fuller 1979, Elody and Sloan 
1985). They avoid agriculture, fragmented 
woodlots and young forests in New Hampshire, 
Connecticut, Ontario and New Jersey (Smith 
1978, Bosakowski 1994, Van Ael 1996). In 
Alberta and Saskatchewan, old mixedwood 
forest is the primary habitat for barred owls 
during the breeding season (Mazur et al. 1998, 
Takats 1998, Olsen 1999). When forest clearings 
are abundant, barred owls are susceptible to 
predation by great horned owls {Bubo 
virginianus) (Laidig and Dobkin 1995). In New 
Jersey, declining populations have been 
attributed to habitat loss and fragmentation 
resulting from logging and conversion to 
agricultural land (Bosakowski et al. 1987). In 
western North America, barred owls occur in 
mature and old mixedwood and conifer forests 
(Wright and Hayward 1998), sometimes in 
association with spotted owls (Strix occidentalis) 
(Dunbar et al. 1991), and also in second-growth 
forest (Leder and Walters 1980, Hamer 1988). 
Habitat selection by barred owls can be 
explained, for the most part, by nest site and prey 
availability. Barred owls are among the largest 
cavity nesters in North America. Although 
platforms (Mazur et al. 1997), cliff banks 
(Shakelford and Earley 1996) and ground nests 
(Robertson 1 959) have been reported as nesting 
sites, tree cavities appear to be preferred, 
possibly for microclimatic characteristics, and/ 
or protection from predators (Postupalsky et al. 
1997). In two studies, diameter at breast height 
(dbh) was greater for nesting sites than it was 
for random sites, suggesting that relatively large 
trees, which contain relatively large cavities, are 
required (Devereux and Mosher 1984, Olsen 
1999). Reported nest tree diameters are 49 cm 
in Michigan (Postupalsky et al. 1997) and 
61 cm in the central Appalachians (Devereux 
and Mosher 1 984). In Alberta, most barred owl 
nests have been found in dead, hollow snags of 
balsam poplar (Populus balsamifera) and aspen 
(P. tremuloides) averaging 74 cm dbh in the 
Foothills Natural Region (Takats 1998), and 
52 cm dbh in the Boreal Forest Natural Region 
(Olsen 1999). In Alberta, trees of this species 
and of this size would be greater than 1 20 years 
in age (Alberta Environmental Protection 1985, 
Lee etal. 1995b). 
Canopy cover and stand structure of the 
surrounding forest are important components of 
breeding habitat for barred owls. As the owlets 
leave the cavity at an early age (4-5 weeks old), 
the surrounding forest becomes an important 
surrogate nest while the young are flightless ( 1 0- 
12 weeks old). Perches and roost trees in close 
proximity to the nesting cavity are important 
habitat during this stage of development. In 
Alberta, white spruce {Picea glauca) and balsam 
fir {Abies balsamea) provide adequate shade and 
protective cover post-fledging (Olsen unpubl. 
data). The use of nesting cavities in deciduous 
trees during egg laying and brood rearing, 
followed by preference for conifers post- 
fledging, may explain why barred owls are more 
likely to breed in mixedwood stands compared 
to other stand types. 
CONSERVATION BIOLOGY 
The barred owl takes its name from the Latin 
word varia, describing the variegated streaking 
pattern of the species’ body plumage. Greyish- 
brown in color, the barred owl has a rounded 
head, white facial discs, no ear tufts and dark 
brown eyes. Although similar in morphology, 
males are smaller than females in size and weight 
(males average 632 g, females average 801 g; 
Johnsgard 1 988). Breeding pairs are known for 
their elaborate repertoire of calls, including a 
distinctive eight-syllable vocalization that can 
be described phonetically as “Who cooks for 
you, who cooks for you all?” Although this call 
can be heard year-round, it is most commonly 
heard early in the breeding season (March- April) 
when courtship and territorial activities 
commence. 
Presumed monogamous, barred owls breed once 
per season unless the first clutch is lost, in which 
case a second or third breeding attempt is 
possible (Bent 1938). Nesting begins with the 
laying of the first egg in late winter or early 
spring, depending on latitude. In the central 
Appalachians, the mean egg date reported by 
Devereux and Mosher (1984) was 20 March. 
Clutch size can range from one to four eggs, but 
2-3 is typical. Murray (1976) reported a mean 
clutch size of 2.41 based on 315 samples 
(Murray 1976). Incubation lasts 28-33 days 
(Johnsgard 1988) and begins before the last egg 
has been laid, resulting in asynchronous 
hatching. The mean hatching date in the central 
Appalachians was 10 April (Devereux and 
Mosher 1984). Brooding continues until the 
youngest chick is several weeks old. After 
brooding, the owlets remain in the nest for 
several weeks and are fed by the adults. Once 
the young become too large for their cavity, they 
perch in trees surrounding the nest and continue 
to be fed by the parents. After fledging, the 
juveniles remain within the family group for up 
to four months before dispersing (Dunstan and 
Sample 1972, Johnsgard 1988). 
There is no detailed information on sex ratio, 
average age of breeding, or survivorship of 
barred owls. The oldest known individual lived 
1 8 years 2 months in the wild (Klimkiewicz and 
Futcher 1 989). First breeding is presumed to be 
at two years of age (Mazur and James 2000); 
however, successful nesting of yearlings of the 
congeneric spotted owl {Strix occidentalis) has 
been reported (Hamer et al. 1994). Breeding is 
presumed to be annual, but nonbreeding years 
are common for some individuals (L. Priestley, 
pers. comm.). 
The barred owl is highly territorial and responds 
aggressively to neighbours and call playbacks. 
Breeding season territories are generally 
maintained between years, but can increase 
considerably during the winter months 
depending on prey availability and habitat 
characteristics. Several studies have estimated 
barred owl home range size from radio telemetry 
data. In a Minnesota study, Nicholls and Fuller 
( 1 987) reported home range estimates averaging 
273 ha (n = 1 3). Elody and Sloan ( 1 985) reported 
an estimate of 282 ha based on a sample of seven 
individuals in Michigan. In Alberta, barred owl 
breeding season home range size was estimated 
at 337 ha (n = 9, Olsen 1 999). In a Washington 
study, Hamer (1988) reported a breeding season 
estimate of 32 1 ha (n = 8), and a nonbreeding 
estimate of 664 ha (n = 10). In Saskatchewan, 
home range size was estimated to be 149 ha 
(n = 12) in the breeding season, and 1234 ha 
(n = 1 3) in the nonbreeding period (Mazur et al. 
1998). 
DISTRIBUTION 
1. Alberta - The barred owl has been recorded 
as far north as High Level, Alberta and the most 
southerly records are from the Cardston area, 
near the Montana border (see Figure 1). The 
earliest recorded occurrence of the species is an 
observation made near Fort McMurray, Alberta 
in 1934 (Preble 1941). It is not known whether 
the species was resident before this time, because 
pre-1900 ornithological records for the region 
are sparse. Evidence for a breeding population 
was obtained in 1 949, when a family of barred 
owls was observed on the Prairie River near 
Slave Lake (Grant 1966). The first confirmed 
nesting site was not located until nearly two 
decades later, in Edmonton, Alberta (Jones 
1966). During the 30 years following the first 
breeding observation, only eight nesting sites 
were confirmed for the entire province, as 
reported by Boxall and Stepney (1982). More 
recent observations have been made in the 
Foothills, Mountains, Parkland and Boreal 
Forest natural regions (Boxall 1986, Jones 1987). 
Presently, over 60 breeding records are known 
(Priestley in press). 
2. Other areas - The barred owl occurs 
throughout the eastern United States, from the 
Atlantic coast to the Great Plains and from 
eastern Texas through Minnesota (Johnsgard 
1988). Its range extends into southern Canada 
through Ontario and Quebec, and eastward into 
New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince 
Edward Island. In western Canada, it occurs 
throughout Manitoba, Saskatchewan and 
Alberta, and into southern portions of the 
Northwest Territories and Yukon (see Figure 2). 
In recent decades, the range of the species has 
been expanding westward (Houston and 
McGowan 1 999). Breeding occurrences for the 
interior of British Columbia (Grant 1966), 
Montana (Shea 1974), Vancouver Island 
(Harrington-Tweit and Mattocks 1984), 
Washington (Rogers 1 966), Oregon (Taylor and 
Forsman 1976) and California (Evens and 
Le Valley 1982) confirm that the species has 
become well established in the Pacific and Inland 
Northwest (Dark et al. 1998). Range expansion 
of the barred owl has resulted in overlap with 
the northern spotted owl, as these species have 
similar habitat requirements and both forage 
primarily on nocturnal prey (Taylor and Forsman 
1976). Interspecific competition and 
hybridization (Hamer et al. 1994) are 
jeopardizing spotted owl populations (Kelly et 
al. 2003) where these congeners overlap in range. 
There is also an isolated population of barred 
owls in the central plateau of Mexico. 
POPULATION SIZE AND TRENDS 
1. Alberta - Although occurrence records 
suggest that the barred owl is only sparsely 
distributed in the province (Semenchuk 1992), 
field surveys indicate that it can be locally 
abundant in areas of suitable habitat. Field 
surveys typically use transect-based point counts 
whereby the identity of calling individuals is not 
known and therefore only relative abundance can 
be determined. Owl surveys are also non- 
random, because they rely on road access, 
potentially biasing samples towards certain 
habitat types where roads more commonly occur. 
Furthermore, the lack of a standard protocol for 
conducting owl surveys has hampered 
comparisons between studies with differing 
methodology, intensity and replication. In 2003, 
Bird Studies Canada initiated a monitoring 
program to determine population trends of 
nocturnal owls across a large geographical area 
over the longer term (L. Priestley, pers. comm.). 
Nonetheless, existing survey data collected prior 
to this program can be useful for determining 
species’ distribution and relative abundance in 
localized areas. 
Owl surveys conducted near Calling Lake, 
Alberta from 1 994-1996 (Hannon unpubl. data) 
demonstrated that after logging there was a 33% 
decline in barred owl detections (mean density 
0.1 owls/km^) and an increase of 60% in 
detections of great homed owls (0.06 owls/km^), 
which prey on barred owls. In 1997, a follow- 
up study examined old mixedwood forest 
adjacent to burns, clearcuts and contiguous 
forest. Barred owl detections were greatest in 
the contiguous forest, and lower in the young 
and burned forest landscapes (Olsen and Hannon 
unpubl.). Conversely, great homed owls were 
less abundant in the contiguous forest compared 
to the young and burned samples (Olsen and 
Hannon unpubl.). Detection of both species was 
greatest at the forest-cutblock interface, 
suggesting that these species have the greatest 
spatial overlap in fragmented landscapes (Olsen 
and Hannon unpubl.). 
Owl surveys conducted in 1995 and 1996 
indicated that barred owls are one of the most 
common breeding residents, equal in abundance 
to the great homed owl, in the Foothills Natural 
Region (Takats 1998). During this study, the 
number of barred owl detections decreased from 
33 in 1995 to 25 in 1996, and the number of 
great homed owl detections increased from 25 
to 30 (Takats 1998). Analysis of barred owl 
survey data from this study and three others 
conducted in the Foothills Natural Region 
between 1999 and 2001 resulted in a density 
estimate (95% Cl) of 0.013-0.047 owls/km^ for 
that region (Piorecky 2003). Given the patchy 
distribution of suitable breeding habitat for the 
species, however, it is overly simplistic to apply 
this density over the forested land base of Alberta 
in an attempt to obtain a provincial population 
estimate. The species is comparatively rare in 
the province, with less than 70 nesting records 
(Priestley, in press) and only 145 auditory 
occurrences (territorial birds calling) 
documented in the last 100 years (Alberta 
Sustainable Resource Development and the 
Alberta Conservation Association 2000). 
Relative to more common owl species in Alberta, 
surveys in 2004 showed that at 670 survey 
points, great homed owls and northern saw-whet 
owls {Aegolius acadicus) were both about 10 
times more common than were barred owls 
(Beaverhill Bird Observatory, unpubl. data) 
despite the fact that many of the routes were 
selected in a non-random fashion and where 
some were chosen specifically with the hope of 
encountering species like the barred owl. 
Although recent studies have shown populations 
of barred owl to be declining over the short term 
and in localized areas, some authors speculate 
that the species is increasing in abundance and 
distribution in the province as a whole (Boxall 
and Stepney 1982). Longer-tenn studies over 
large geographical areas are required to 
determine population trajectories for this species, 
especially considering the scale of industrial 
forestry operations in the province at present. 
Measures of habitat condition and prey 
availability should also be made, to control for 
annual variability in habitat quantity and quality 
over time. Volunteer owl surveys are an 
excellent monitoring tool, aided by standard 
protocols and consistent methodologies over the 
longer term (Takats 200 1 ). The barred owl does 
not experience population cycles. Because the 
species is a generalist predator, populations are 
not susceptible to prey-induced population 
fluctuations observed in other forest owls of the 
region (i.e., boreal owl [Aegolius funereus] and 
northern saw- whet owl). 
2. Other Areas - Currently, the Canadian 
population of barred owls is estimated at 1 0 000- 
50 000 pairs (Kirk and Hyslop 1998). 
Throughout North America, populations are 
stable or increasing. From 1 966-1 996, Breeding 
Bird Survey data showed a significant increase 
of 3.3% across the entire North American 
population (Sauer et al. 2003). From 1959- 
1988, populations in North America increased 
by 0.7% according to Christmas Bird Count data 
(Sauer et al. 1996), although it is clear that the 
survey protocol involved is relatively poor for 
the detection of nocturnal raptors. Despite these 
suggestions of slight population increases, more 
detailed studies in Illinois (Sauer et al. 2003) 
and New Jersey (Bosakowski 1994) have 
documented population declines as a result of 
extensive forest clearing and habitat loss. 
Conversely, in the Pacific Northwest, barred 
owls have increased in distribution and 
abundance to the point where they are now 
believed to be displacing spotted owls (Dark et 
al. 1998, Kelly etal. 2003). 
LIMITING FACTORS 
Reductions in average stand age and stand 
structure are the primary threats to barred owl 
populations in Alberta. Although there has never 
been a timber supply analysis done specifically 
for barred owls, Schneider et al. (2003) showed 
that old growth forest in Alberta will be virtually 
eliminated within 60 years at current harvesting 
intensities. Potential changes that would affect 
barred owls include a younger and more 
fragmented forest landscape, a reduction in snag 
density and fewer potential nesting sites, as well 
as increased competition by great homed owls. 
In the east, barred owl populations have declined 
as a result of extensive habitat loss and 
competition with great horned owls in 
fragmented areas (Bosakowski 1994); the 
persistence of the species is directly related to 
the continued existence of large contiguous tracts 
of unfragmented habitat (Laidig and Dobkin 
1 995), which is unlikely in most managed forests 
in Alberta given present management guidelines 
(Alberta Government 1994). 
Barred owls preferentially select old mixedwood 
forests, which are the stands with the highest 
density of large diameter snags (Lee et al. 1 995a, 
Lee 1998). In Alberta, policy requires that the 
oldest stands be harvested first (Alberta 
Government 1994), creating conflict between 
forest management and habitat supply for species 
dependent on old growth forest. Moreover, 
present forestry guidelines in Alberta permit 
harvesting of re-grown aspen-dominated stands 
at the age of 70 years. As it takes a minimum of 
100 years to produce barred owl nesting trees, 
there appears to be a strong conflict between 
present harvesting guidelines and barred owl 
conservation. Large diameter trees and snags 
are required within cutblocks to provide suitable 
and potentially suitable nesting sites for barred 
owls within the regenerating forest. Presently, 
riparian buffer strips, where logging is excluded, 
are the greatest source of potential nesting sites 
for barred owls in the managed forests of Alberta. 
The management of such buffer areas for old 
growth features such as barred owl nesting trees 
will be critical to the conservation of this species 
in the province. Proposals to allow harvesting 
within such protective buffers should be 
evaluated in consideration of the habitat needs 
of barred owls and other old-growth-dependent 
species. 
STATUS DESIGNATIONS* 
7. Alberta - In 1985, the barred owl was listed 
as “Status Undetermined” because information 
on the species was too limited at the time to allow 
a credible designation (Alberta Fish and Wildlife 
1985). In 1991, the species was placed on the 
“Yellow List” for sensitive species that are not 
at risk, but require special attention because of 
their rarity, distribution or habitat requirements 
(Alberta Forestry, Lands and Wildlife 1991). In 
1996, that designation remained unchanged 
because populations were believed to be 
declining in the Parkland Natural Region and 
habitat for the species was considered to be at 
risk elsewhere (Alberta Environmental 
Protection 1996). Presently, the barred owl is 
listed as Sensitive in recognition of the apparent 
conflict between known habitat requirements for 
the species and present forest management 
practices (Alberta Sustainable Resource 
Development 2001). The barred owl is also 
currently listed on the Alberta Natural Heritage 
Information Centre’s Watch List, and is listed 
as S3/S4 provincially (Alberta Natural Heritage 
Information Centre 2002a). It is ranked Sensitive 
in Alberta by the Canadian Endangered Species 
Conservation Council (CESCC 2001). 
2, Other Areas - The barred owl has not been 
evaluated by the Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC). 
The Canadian Endangered Species Conservation 
Council (CESCC) ranks the barred owl as 
Sensitive in Saskatchewan and Secure in British 
Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New 
Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward 
Island (CESCC 2001). Globally, the species is 
ranked as G5 — demonstrably widespread, 
abundant and secure (NatureServe 2004). In the 
United States and Canada the barred owl is 
ranked as N5 — common, widespread and 
abundant (NatureServe 2004). At the state level, 
the barred owl is listed as S5 — Secure or S4 — 
Apparently Secure in Alabama (S5), Arkansas 
(S4), Connecticut (S5), Georgia (S5), Idaho (S4), 
Illinois (S5), Indiana (S4), Iowa (S5), Kansas 
(54) , Kentucky (S5), Louisiana (S5), Maine (S5), 
Maryland (S5), Massachusetts (S5), Michigan 
(55) , Mississippi (S5), Montana (S4), New 
Hampshire (S5), New York (S5), North Carolina 
(54) , Ohio (S5), Oklahoma (S4/S5), 
Pennsylvania (S5), Rhode Island (S4/S4), 
Tennessee (S5), Texas (S5), Vermont (S5), 
Virginia (S5), Washington (S5), West Virginia 
(55) and Wisconsin (S4) (NatureServe 2004). 
At the state level, the barred owl is listed as S3 — 
Vulnerable or S2 — Imperiled in Delaware (S2), 
District of Columbia (S2), Nebraska (S2) and 
New Jersey (S3). At the provincial level, the 
barred owl is listed as S5 — Secure or S4 — 
Apparently Secure in British Columbia (S5), 
New Brunswick (S5), Nova Scotia (S5), Ontario 
(S4/S5), Prince Edward Island (S5) and Quebec 
(S5) (NatureServe 2003). It is listed as S3 — 
Vulnerable or S2 — Imperiled in Manitoba (S3/ 
S4) and Saskatchewan (S3/S2) (NatureServe 
2004). 
RECENT MANAGEMENT IN ALBERTA 
The barred owl has been used as a focal species 
(Lambeck 1997) in eastern North America 
(USDA 1 985, 1 986) and western Canada (James 
et al. 1995). Given its habitat requirements and 
large home range size, the species has been 
proposed as an indicator of ecosystem health for 
old growth biological communities in the boreal 
forest (James et al. 1995). Monitoring is 
necessary to determine whether population 
changes are occurring as a result of land use 
activities, climate change and an increasing 
industrial footprint in the province. The Alberta 
Nocturnal Owl Survey aims to provide inventory 
data on the distribution and relative abundance 
of barred owls and other sensitive species over 
the longer term. In conjunction with similar 
studies across Canada and elsewhere, the 
Nocturnal Owl Survey program will provide 
valuable information that is otherwise not 
captured on volunteer owl monitoring programs 
such as the Breeding Bird Survey, May Species 
Count, Edmonton Owl Prowl and Alberta Owl 
Prowl. 
SYNTHESIS 
The barred owl was first detected in the province 
of Alberta in the 1930s. Whether it was a 
relatively common resident here before that time 
is not known, but increased access to forested 
areas in the province and interest in owl surveys 
have resulted in a substantial increase in our 
knowledge of the species in the province in the 
last 15 years. Occurrence records and field 
surveys indicate that the species is widespread 
and locally abundant in the Parkland, Foothills, 
and Boreal Forest natural regions. Detailed 
studies have shown that its breeding habitat 
requirements are best satisfied by old 
mixedwood forest. Old mixedwood is selected 
because of the abundance of suitable nesting 
cavities in very old balsam poplar and aspen trees 
in these forest types. Present forest management 
practices will remove much of this habitat type 
in managed forest stands over the next few 
decades. Present forest management practices 
also make it unlikely that such habitat elements 
will be created in regenerating stands in managed 
forest before harvest is re-initiated. Therefore, 
riparian areas and uplands with a high number 
of large diameter (>50 cm) trees will continue 
to be an important source of natural nesting sites 
for the barred owl in Alberta. Careful 
management of these areas, designed to preserve 
and to continue to produce such habitat elements, 
will be necessary to prevent the disappearance 
of the barred owl over most of its range in 
Alberta. 
